# Python_Project
Title of the Project is Pneumonia Detection using Machine Learning and Python

Main aim of the project is To present a method for detecting and classifying pneumonia in patients based on their chest X-ray images using a EfficientNetB1 model in convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
This project presents a method for detecting and classifying pneumonia in patients based on their chest X-ray images using EfficientNetB1 model in convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The proposed approach utilizes a series of convolutional and max-pooling layers followed by SeLU activation to process the input images. The processed features are then passed through dense layers with sigmoid activation at the output neuron for classification. To improve model generalization, data augmentation techniques are employed. The proposed model is used to develop a robust and efficient model capable of accurately identifying pneumonia cases from chest X-ray images. The experimental results demonstrate that the EfficientNetB1 CNN model achieves high accuracy in pneumonia detection, making it a promising tool for early diagnosis in clinical settings.                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Keywords: Pneumonia, CT scans, Deep Learning, Image Analysis, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)

 About Punemonia - Pneumonia is a respiratory infection that affects the lungs, causing inflammation in the air sacs, or alveoli. It can be caused by various infectious agents, including bacteria, viruses, fungi, or parasites. Pneumonia can range from mild to severe and can be life-threatening, particularly in vulnerable populations such as young children, the elderly, and those with weakened immune systems. Treatment for pneumonia depends on the cause and severity of the infection. Bacterial pneumonia is commonly treated with antibiotics, while viral pneumonia may require supportive care such as rest, hydration, and antiviral medications. In severe cases, hospitalization may be necessary for close monitoring and intravenous antibiotics or oxygen therapy.

About CNN - A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a class of deep neural networks primarily designed to process and analyse visual data such as images. CNNs have revolutionized various fields such as computer vision, image recognition, and medical imaging due to their ability to automatically and accurately learn hierarchical patterns and features directly from raw pixel data.

About EfficientNetB1 - In our proposed project for pneumonia detection using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), we employed the EfficientNetB1 model architecture, a fundamental building block in deep learning frameworks such as Keras. The Sequential model allowed us to construct our CNN architecture layer by layer in a sequential fashion, facilitating the intuitive design and implementation of the neural network. Beginning with the input layer, which received grayscale Chest X-ray images of dimensions (256, 256, 3), we sequentially added convolutional layers, batch normalization layers, max pooling layers, dropout layers, and fully connected layers. Each layer played a crucial role in feature extraction, dimensionality reduction, regularization, and high-level reasoning, ultimately leading to accurate pneumonia detection. The EfficientNetB1 model provided a clear and organized structure for our CNN architecture, enabling us to easily experiment with different layer configurations, hyperparameters, and optimization techniques. By leveraging the Sequential model, we were able to efficiently develop and train our pneumonia detection model, achieving high accuracy and robust performance on unseen data.

EfficientNetB1 Model -                                                                                                                               base_model=keras.applications.EfficientNetB1(weights='imagenet',                                                                                                                        include_top=False,input_shape=(256, 256, 3))                                                                                                                                                                        x = base_model.output                                                                                                                                                                                               x = keras.layers.Conv2D(filters=256, kernel_size=(5, 5), strides=(1, 1),                                                                                                                           activation='relu', padding="same")(x)                                                                                                                                                                               x = keras.layers.Conv2D(filters=128, kernel_size=(5, 5), strides=(1, 1),                                                                                                                           activation='relu', padding="same")(x)                                                                                                                                                                                x = keras.layers.Conv2D(filters=256, kernel_size=(5, 5), strides=(1, 1),                                                                                                                               activation='relu', padding="same")(x)                                                                                                                                                                               x = keras.layers.GlobalAveragePooling2D()(x)                                                                                                                                                                        x = keras.layers.Dense(128, activation='selu')(x)                                                                                                                                                               output = keras.layers.Dense(3, activation="softmax")(x)                                                                                                                                                          model = keras.Model(inputs=base_model.input, outputs=output)                                                                                                                                                         iters = int(train_df.shape[0]/32)*25                                                                                                                                                                              one_cycl = OneCycleLR(iters,max_lr=0.00085)                                                                                                                                                                          model.compile(                                                                                                                                                                                            loss='categorical_crossentropy',                                                                                                                                                                                    optimizer='adam',                                                                                                                                                                                                    metrics=['accuracy']                                                                                                                                                                                                 )                                                                                                                                          history2=model.fit(train,validation_data=val,epochs=25,batch_size=32,callbacks=[one_cycl])

Dataset Description - The dataset used in this project was sourced from Kaggle and is named the "Lung Disease". It consists of images of chest X-rays categorized into two main classes: "Normal" and "Pneumonia." The dataset is organized into three directories: “Lung_Opacity”, "Normal" and "Viral Pneumonia," each containing a subset for training and testing purposes.Directory Structure:Lung_Opacity: Contains 1125 files categorized as Lung_Opacity chest X-rays.Normal: Contains 1250 files categorized as normal chest X-rays. Pneumonia: Contains 1100 files categorized as pneumonia chest X-rays.
 
Conclusion -  Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for Pneumonia detection is to develop a robust and accurate system for automatically identifying and classifying lung infection from medical images such as X-rays, CT scans, or MRI scans.In conclusion, achieving a 98% accuracy by epoch 25, contributes to early and effective pneumonia diagnosis, marks a significant advancement in our project's efficiency compared to previous endeavours where the same benchmark was reached by epoch 25 with 92% accuracy.

Future Scope - We will try this approach on more datasets in the future and compare these results to that of human experts. It is envisaged that in the future, models using transfer learning technologies that will undergo training on this dataset would show better outcomes than this CNN model.
